=== PAGE 1 ===
Gfnf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT RESPONSE 14 JULY 2020 
Train station crowding  
ACE S GROU P RE SP ON SE  TO  N E W S OU T H WA LE S  AU D IT OR -GE N E RA L ’S RE PO RT  

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
2 
 
Executive Summary 
This report has been prepared by ACESGroup in response to the New South Wales Auditor-
General’s Report to Parliament for ‘Train station crowding – Measuring and understanding 
crowding at train stations’ dated 30 April 2020. 
The purpose of the report is to offer practical cost-effective solutions to certain key findings 
of the Auditor-General’s report.  
This report proposes a collaboration project to demonstrate how the DCM decision support 
engine and dashboard could be cost-effectively configured and implemented to aid real-
time decision-making about crowd management station by station. 
The DCM decision support engine and dashboard applies advanced data analytics 
algorithms and techniques that apply Complex Adaptive Systems to address “When do 
customers become a crowd, and when should crowd management be applied?” 
Section 1 notes certain key findings of the audit report and suggests currently available 
solutions. 
Section 2 of the report provides a proposed integrated offering.  
Section 3 of the report details the history and experience of the authors. 
The services offered are: 
 unique analytical software services to measure crowd density flow and mood in 
crowds (to validate the call for more and better data), 
 crowd management consultancy services to transfer knowledge to TfNSW platform 
and station staff as to how to interpret the data as actionable insights for crowd 
management actions,  
 risk management consultancy services to assess crowd risks and manage and 
mitigate crowd risks, in consultation with station staff and applying the ISO 31000 
(Risk Management) Standard, and 
 an invitation to develop a crowd management training program for TfNSW staff with 
a Registered Training Organisation.  

=== PAGE 3 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
3 
 
1. Key findings of the Auditor-General’s report and our 
responses 
Sydney Trains has identified crowding on platforms as a key strategic risk but does not have a 
specific strategy to manage crowding  
To develop a crowd management strategy , large sets of data need to be collected , interpreted 
and applied having regard to the Transport for NSW’s (TfNSW’s) acceptable risk profile.  
ACESGroup provides strategic crowd risk assessment, management and mitigation services and 
associated consultancy and advice. ACESGroup has done so for many years.  ACESGroup 
developed Dynamic Crowd Measurement (DCM) as an adv anced data analytics application to 
enable real-time crowd management by DCM users, utilising reliable and verifiable data insights 
to implement stra tegies and site-specific plans developed by or for each DCM user .  Real-time 
measurement of density, flow and mood of people at and around sites presented to decision-
makers as readily understood visualisations enable reliably consistent decision-making by crowd 
managers.    The timing and effect of management interventions can be measured.  This is a digital 
crowd management landscape form. 
Sydney Trains response to crowding is to restrict customers from accessing platforms or stations 
which will likely result in deteriorating satisfaction and increased travel times for those 
customers directly affected 
The DCM solution is able to provide real-time reliable insights as to the collective mood 
(sentiment) of customers, ensuring that customer sentiment is at the forefront when decision 
makers are required to implement and execute crowd management plans.   
Precise information allows for prompt and effective action.   
The DCM dashboard can be provided on the mobile device of station staff.  See the link to mood 
measurement dash board working at VIVID Sydney in 2019.  
Sydney Trains does not directly assess the effect of its management of station crowding on 
customer experience and travel times 
Collective sentiment measures will highlight any change in mood of customers on platforms, 
providing triggers for station staff to make communications or for  re-scheduling.  Long and short 
term projections (including extent of deviation from historical normal for particular platform at 
particular time on particular day) can be made by analysing the relationship between ve locity, 
density and mood on station platforms.  Station and platform specific c ustomer sentiment 
measures can become a key performance indicator. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
4 
DCM can provide quantitative data on the disparity of customer sentimen t caused by delays in 
access and travel times.   
DCM is working towards an automated alert system for transport hubs and seeking research 
partners to streamline management response alerts. 
Sydney Trains devolves responsibility for the management of station crowding to local station 
managers but does not have sufficient oversight of crowd management plans at stations  
 
ACESGroup can provide a suite of crowd and risk management materials addressed specifically to 
the needs of TfNSW and Sydney Trains .  Travis Semmens , an expert crowd management 
consultant responsible for planning for multiple NSW major public events (including VIVID, for the 
last 10 years, and City of Sydney New Years’ Eve, for the past 3 years), would lead this task.   
 
ACESGroup includes a R egistered Training Organisation, Affirm Training RTO 900 24 to provide 
accredited crowd management training .  This would equip TfNSW and Sydney Trains with 
education and resources required to implement crowd management plans at stations.  Training 
could be provided to all relevant staff members  to teach staff how to respond to the data alerts 
and why, for reliably effective and consistent crowd control management. 
DCM w ould provide data analytics on crowd density, velocity and mood in order to provide 
forecasts for staff intervention, benchmarking and planning input.  These analytics will act as the 
basis when drafting and auditing crowd management plans. 
Sydney Trains does not directly measure crowding at stations 
DCM can directly measure crowding in stations through existing digital Closed Circuit Television 
(CCTV) inputs and provide analysis by pr oviding person counts, density, and flow  and mood 
ratings.  
DCM is largely agnostic as to digital CCTV inputs.  The DCM solution has been developed to handle 
inputs from low light and other sub -optimal installations.  The DCM solution should be suitable 
for implementation in relation to digital CCTV inputs from many stations without CCTV retrofit. 
The DCM solution can present data visualisations of relationships between density, velocity and 
mood,  thereby providing a verifiably reliable evidence base to aid in decision making for good 
crowd management.  
Operation of the DCM solution does not require retention of input data, or merger of CCTV input 
data with any external datasets, further protecting data privacy of commuters and data security. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
5 
Airport Link is responsible for the management of crowding at stations on the airport line, 
however the procedures it uses are limited in comparison to Sydney Trains' customer 
management plans 
The collaboration suggested can be across all platforms and offered to all partners and 
stakeholders, including surrounding streets, arcades, pedestrian tunnels and interchanges.  
The crowd management plan would be templated to a system -wide standard but configured to 
be station specific .  These configurations can address features of paricular station concourses, 
surrounding streets, arcades, pedestrian tunnels and interchanges.  
Sydney Trains does not have a routine process for identifying whether crowding contributed to 
minor safety incidents 
Crowd management plans and related incident response procedures could establish this routine 
process. 
The DCM solution can present a time stamped and verifiably reliable historical evidence base. 
TfNSW is delivering a program to influence transport demand in key precincts, but the overall 
impact of this program on crowding is not clear 
Transport demand can be supported by real time quantitative data to verify the models currently 
produced.  
Actual real-time quantitative crowd data can support scheduling review with a verifiably reliable 
historical evidence base, to enable build of better scheduling models for Transport for NSW and 
Sydney Trains.  
 
2. Proposed Integrated Offering 
 
The purpose of this report is to propose an integrated offer.   
 
The auditor’s report details specific skill sets to remedy the key issues identified.  ACESGroup 
comprises of  several divisions/entities that can offer crowd management training, crowd 
management consultancy, crowd risk management and crowd data collection.    Collectively this 
group has the skills to identify all the key issues.  This integrated offering includes Dynamic Crowd 
Measurement Pty Ltd  and ACESGroup including its divisions Affirm Training and Avert Risk 
Management Services (trading names of ACESGroup) .   Established in 1985, ACESGroup is a long 
term government supplier, including as a panel provider to the current NSW Whole of Government 
contract since 2010. 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
6 
To match the key issues to the skill sets required a detailed table is offered below. 
Key Issues ACESGroup  
Sydney Trains has identified 
crowding on platforms as a key 
strategic risk but does not have a 
specific strategy to manage 
crowding 
DCM can provide: 
 Live and historical crowd data analytics 
 Notifications providing updates on changes to crowd 
metrics and alerts levels 
 Playback of real-time and retrospective data against live 
images and heat maps 
 Forecasting of actions required for management 
intervention for mood manipulation. 
 
ACESGroup can provide: 
 Draft strategies to manage crowding, management, 
intervention and responses 
 Policies to support creation, monitoring and evaluation 
of Crowd Management Plans. 
Avert can provide: 
 Risk management planning and training for all relevant 
staff members 
 Policies and procedures to support creation, monitoring 
and evaluation of risk and safety measures. 
Affirm Training can provide:  
 staff capability training. 
Sydney Trains response to 
crowding is to restrict customers 
from accessing platforms or 
stations which will likely result in 
deteriorating satisfaction and 
increased travel times for those 
customers directly affected 
 
DCM can provide:  
 Data analytics to show mood, density and velocity 
 Mood analytics analysing customer sentiment.  
Sydney Trains does not directly 
assess the effect of its 
management of station crowding 
on customer experience and travel 
times 
DCM can provide: 
 Data measuring mood and facial expression 
interpretation (negative, neutral and positive) allowing 
4-15-minute advance warnings of falls in crowd mood 
 Data providing accurate customer experience and 
feedback. 
 
Sydney Trains devolves 
responsibility for the management 
of station crowding to local station 
managers but does not have 
DCM can provide: 
 Data analytics providing accurate data on density, 
velocity and mood to provide forecasts for staff 
intervention, benchmarking and planning input 
 Periodic sentiment reporting with visual support 

=== PAGE 7 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
7 
sufficient oversight of crowd 
management plans at stations 
 Data analytics to assist in weekly forecasting for staff 
allocation, cost minimization, effective planning for 
future events 
 Data to assist in providing metrics via live dashboard for 
effective management and intervention. 
 
Affirm Training can provide:  
 Training required for crowd management 
implementation 
 Training and recommendations on gap analysis 
 Training and recommendations on management 
intervention 
 Training on knowledge on crowd issues and responses 
 Consultancy to streamline Crowd Management Plans 
and training for holistic implementation 
 Scenario training and material to develop pre-planned 
management technics. 
Avert can provide:  
 formal risk planning management. 
Sydney Trains does not directly 
measure crowding at stations 
DCM can provide: 
 Real time data and analytics from multiple locations 
simultaneously via zone monitoring 
 Data on velocity, density and mood providing data 
playback 
 Geo-spatial heat map to identify hot spots for density, 
velocity, mood and social distancing 
 Weekly forecasting to effectively allocate staff 
 Measurement of customer experience based off mood 
and facial expressions of patrons 
 4-15-minute advance warnings in anticipation of phase 
changes based on data collection 
 Data aggregation such as transport arrivals. 
TfNSW and Sydney Trains do not 
have performance measures for 
crowding at stations 
 
DCM can provide: 
 Real-time data collection and analytics to identify 
weaknesses to improve KPI’s 
 Data evidence to draft the non-existent KPI’s for 
crowding 
 Data measuring the mood of patrons (low, medium, 
high) to measure patron satisfaction 
 Weekly forecasting tool to effectively allocate staff in 
high problem areas. 
ACESGroup can provide: 
 Gap analysis training and implementation for 
performance measures 

=== PAGE 8 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
8 
 Training for station staff for knowledge on crowd issues 
and responses. 
 
Sections 1 & 2 detailed the key findings of the Auditors’ Report and provided accessible solutions 
that are currently available for immediate deployment.    
The DCM solution provides quantitative inputs to develop decision making models , however 
automation of business processes for crowd management capability requires more than analysis 
of raw data.  We propose a hybrid approach.  
 
The flow chart below has been adapted from ISO  31000, the Risk Management standard,  and is 
provided to show the research principle that underpins the proposed solution implemented with 
TfNSW.  DCM provides the  raw data on crowd mood (being the output of suc cessful crowd 
management) then uses Bayesian networks and consultation with TfNSW staff to analyse and 
determine when crowd intervention is required.     
 
This dual approach of expert op inion and instrumentation data can be used to build a causal 
inference engine.  The  inference engine can assist building an agent based model and combi ne 
data from the inference engine to verify, modify and correct computational assumptions building 
an accurate decision making process , analogous to ‘having three hands on the steering wheel ’. 
With robust decision support technology, consistent management response can be enabled and 
its effect (outcome) measured, improving feedback loops and continuous improvement in plans 
and process. 
 
Image:  Flowchart Principles adapted from ISO 31000 
 


=== PAGE 9 ===
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
9 
DCM applies  Snowden’s Cynefin Management Framework (Snowden & Boone 2007) to crowd 
complexity.  The Cynefin Management Framework has been practically applied in strategic 
Policing where a range of diverse and interdependent factors arise and must be assessed to 
determine response. 
The Cynefin Management Framework as adapted to crowd management provides practical 
management response for each level of complexity.  For instance, in an ordered but complicated 
state, sense‒analyse‒respond is the optimum response, but once the crowd state moves to an 
unordered complex state, then a better approach is probe–sense–respond, noting that sensing is 
required in all states at various stages.  This approach reflects real life tactics of experienced crowd 
controllers.   
3. About ACESGroup
ACESGroup’s approach to maximising efficiency and productivity is to track and monitor activity
performance using customised and propriety software solutions for crowd management.  This
provides the opportunity to ensure organisational consistency, consolidate and simplify
processes and remove inefficiencies.  ACESGroup both innovates to lead industry best practice
and adopts and leverages industry leading practices.
Developing emerging technologies to solve client pain-points, ACESGroup can supplement and
enhance traditional security and crowd management staffing solutions including, vision analytics
for intelligence for crowd decision support.
3.1 Dynamic Crowd Measurement (DCM) 
DCM was initially built to define “when pedestrians becom e a crowd and when a crowd needs 
crowd management”.  This question can solve the TfNSW identification resourcing and scheduling 
responses.  To solve the crowd management puzzle an algorithm had to be developed from the 
loosely coupled factors that affected management output.  An instrument was invented to collect 
and visualise three previously undefined dependant factors.  The DCM solution takes a video 
stream of images, typically sourced from closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras, and analyses 
these inputs to provide movement strategies and management insights to crowd managers.  DCM 
is privacy safeguarded.  DCM does not use facial recognition or store or retain any images in the 
analytic process.  

=== PAGE 10 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
10 
DCM recognises and exploits patterns contained in large data sets to inform predictive modelling, 
being able to identify ‘trigger points’ and phase changes to implement crowd management 
techniques and reduce crowd congestion to the desired target levels.  
 
The DCM object ive is to understand, model, and manage people in spaces, by monitoring 
movement and occupancy levels in real -time and making adjustments to improve safety and 
ensure a positive customer experience.   
Below is a video of DCM also measuring spatial distancing compliance at Circular Quay. 
 
 
Integration of the Crowd Management and Social Distancing tool with other systems can 
provide streamlined management of crowds and aiding decision making.   


=== PAGE 11 ===
 
 
ACESGroup | Performance audit response | Train station Crowding| 14th July 2020 
11 
The DCM solution benefits include: 
 Data to model future design capability 
 Evidence to anticipate decision for better place management 
 Contribution to real-time management of pedestrians and crowds based on real-time data 
rather than prior risk assessments, models or assumptions 
 Better planning for crowd staffing, budgeting, training and management purposes. 
 
3.2 Avert Risk Management and Affirm Training 
Avert R isk Management Services is the division of  ACESGroup that provides expert risk 
management and work, health and safety (WHS)  advisory services for crowded plac es and 
public spaces.  Documents are aligned with National WHS Legislation and  International 
standards, including ISO 31000.  Experience at major publ ic events such as New Year’s Eve , 
Sydney Royal Easter Show and VIVID Sydney reinforce and enhance our mass gathering crowd 
risk knowledge. 
Affirm Training is a registered training organisation (RTO), registration code 90024 with an 
extensive scope of security and crowd management accredited and customised courses.  Affirm 
Training understand vocational training  and have the capability to contextualise training to 
optimise crowd management competency for platform and staff. 
 
4.  An Integrated Solution 
ACESGroup, DCM, Avert and Affirm Training can provide a combined solution providing data 
rich analytics, implementation, integration, education and auditing for Transport for NSW and 
Sydney Trains to ensure the recommendations by the Auditor-General can be achieved. 
ACESGroup CEO Travis Semmens , and Founding Director Andrew Tatrai, are experts in crowd 
management with over 4 0 years of combined experience.  They are able to systematically 
collect crowd information and provide reports advising on procedures required for intervention 
and management purposes.  
Both Travis and Andrew are also the co-founders of DCM, which is able to contribute to the 
proposed solution by providing data analytics on crowd density, velocity and mood.  These 
analytics can be interpreted individually and/or collectively and will aid in providing evidentiary 
support when implementing strategies to manage crowds and risks.  
 
 